---
permalink: /research/
title: "Research"
excerpt: "My Research"
author_profile: true
---

## Research Idea
I am a computational hydrologist, atmospheric modeler, scientist, engineer, teacher and mentor working to improve global understanding of the connection between the land surface we live on and the atmosphere above us. My research aims to build models for water, carbon and energy that apply in data rich uniform cropland, or poorly instrumented vast mountain forests, allowing environmental scientists, modelers and decision makers in all parts of our earth to make informed decisions. To this end, I work to harness a wealth of satellite and in-situ data, high resolution models, fundamental physics, and modern machine learning methods to improve predictions of how water, energy, and carbon moves across the land-atmosphere continuum. 

## Surface Boundary Conditions
Earth system models (ESMs) and mesoscale models have come to employ increasingly complex parameterization schemes for the atmospheric boundary layer, requiring surface boundary conditions for numerous higher order turbulence statistics. Of particular interest is the potential temperature variance (PTV), which is used not only as a boundary condition itself but also to close boundary conditions of other statistics. The existing schemes in ESMs largely rely on the assumptions of Monin-Obukhov similarity theory (MOST) and are not necessarily applicable over complex and heterogeneous surfaces where large scale circulations and roughness sub-layer effects may cause deviations from MOST. The National Ecological Observation Network is used here to evaluate existing parameterizations for the surface boundary of PTV, note key deficiencies, and explore possible remedies. The results indicate that existing schemes are acceptable over a variety of surface conditions provided the analysis of a priori filters out low frequency variability not associated with turbulent time scales. There was, however, significant inter-site variability in observed similarity constants and a significant bias when compared to the textbook values of these parameters. Existing models displayed the poorest performance over heterogeneous sites and rough landscapes. Attempts to use canopy structure and surface roughness characteristics to improve the results confirmed a relation between these variables and PTV but failed to significantly improve the predictive power of the models. The results did not find strong evidence indicating that large scale circulations caused substantial deviations from textbook models, although additional analysis is required to assess their full impacts.

## Boundary Layer Clouds and Secondary Circulations
Heterogeneity in surface temperature can have a significant impact on the atmosphere above. This is especially important to consider closely in the context of traditional ESMs which operate at a large (100 km) scale, often ignoring smaller scale surface information in the land-atmosphere coupling. Previous studies, mostly using high resolution atmospheric models with Large Eddy Simulation (LES), have shown that heterogeneities in the surface field on the order of 5 km or greater can cause secondary circulations to occur in the boundary layer. These circulations result in an overall increase in cloud production and a change in the spatial organization of clouds that could not be captured by homogeneous surfaces such as those you would find in single column boundary layer schemes in traditional ESMs.

My work seeks to address the disparity between the 100km ESM grid cell and the 5km scale sub-grid heterogeneity that can impact clouds. We address this by using a standalone column of Cloud Layers Unified by Binormals (CLUBB), a boundary layer, cloud and shallow convection scheme used in multiple modern ESMs. We set up three simulations. The homogeneous simulation uses a generic standalone single column CLUBB setup. In an uncoupled heterogeneous simulation, we run two independent columns, a dry and wet column, with the surface fluxes for each column derived from the Hydroblocks high resolution land surface model. We compare these to a coupled heterogeneous case, with two columns interacting on a 5 minute time scale through a modeled circulation. Results show that the two column setup with a simple modeled circulation (“coupled” case) can produce realistic responses in cloud development at a fraction of the computational cost of LES. Results show an increase in the vertical Liquid Water Path (LWP) as well as significant changes in the spatial cloud patterns reminiscent of those seen in higher resolution simulations. Sub-grid cloud impacts of surface heterogeneity under shallow convection can be successfully captured with a two column model and results reveal additional avenues for further simplification and eventual implementation in ESMs subgrid schemes. My research shows we can effectively translate these impacts of the small scale onto the large scale without a large expense.
